# MonkeyCAM v4.0 G-Code Program Guide

The G-Code programs generated by MonkeyCAM are designed to work
together to create the parts necessary to build a ski or
snowboard. This includes the core, base material, and nose/tail filler
material.

Each program is described below, in the order in which it should be
used. General information about using the programs is provided after
the program descriptions.

See the [MonkeyCAM v4.0 User’s Guide](
https://github.com/mikemag/MonkeyCAM/blob/master/docs/Users_Guide.md)
for an overview.

**Note: this guide assumes you are very familiar with operating a CNC
  machine, and have a good working understanding of reading and
  writing G-Code, work holding for CNC machines, etc. I will make no
  effort to teach you these things as part of this guide.**


## Guide Holes

The “Guide Holes” program creates two holes in the core blank, one at
each end of the core, centered on the long axis of the core. These
guide holes pass all the way thru the core and into the table surface
a short distance. These are used to allow you to remove the core from
the table and replace it accurately later, possibly flipping it over.

This program uses a straight cutter, typically 0.250”. I use 0.505”
guide holes with 2” long, 0.5” diameter steel pins to realign the
core, and I typically cut ~0.100” into the table.

Before removing the core, I write the core number in the hole with a
pencil so I know which of the many holes in my sacrificial table top I
should use later.

If you have an alternative, reliable way of realigning the core to the
table then you don’t need this program. Be sure that your method
allows you to flip the core over and align the center axis perfectly.


## Alignment Marks

The “Alignment Marks” program places small dimples in various places
over the base of the core blank to mark very useful points for use
after the core has been completely cut out. These mark the following:

* The long center axis of the board.
* The short center axis of the board.
* The center of the effective edge.

These allow you to transfer these guide lines to the base and mold
later.

This program also sinks two extra, deep alignment marks outside of the
core. These are for use in an emergency: if you crash your machine and
do not have accurate limit switches to re-home the machine, then you
can use these marks to very accurately re-home the machine manually.

This program uses a V-shaped cutter of any size, though I use a 0.25”
diameter cutter. Any cutter with a sharp point will do.


## Edge Trench

The “edge trench” program cuts trenches along the effective edge of
the core to allow you to easily inlay sidewall material, and/or a
different species of wood to change the properties of the effective
edge.

This is easier to show than to explain, so check out the [Ash edge
stringer and sidewalls](
http://www.happymonkeysnowboards.com/MonkeyWiki/Ash_edge_stringer_and_sidewalls)
page on MonkeyWiki for pictures.

This program is run and sidewall material added before proceeding
further. This ensures that the sidewalls are machined along with the
rest of the core, so everything matches perfectly.

This program uses a straight cutter, typically 0.250”. It cuts all the
way thru the core


## Edge Groove

The “edge groove” program is run on the base of the core, and creates
a relief for the steel edges so the core sits flat on the base between
the edges. Like most parameters of these programs you can control the
relief depth. It makes a groove wide enough to ensure that the entire
edge will fit, and it ensures that if there is sidewall overhang (see
below) that the sidewall is also cut so epoxy can flow easily past
during pressing.

This program uses a straight cutter, typically 0.250”.


## Insert Holes

The “insert holes” program is run on the base of the core and places
insert holes as specified in the program configuration. The center
holes go almost all the way thru the core (and will be all the way
thru the core after top profiling below), while the “bowls” are set to
the standard depth to accommodate typical snowboard insert parts. The
bowls are not flat and are, well, bowl-shaped since inserts I use have
flanges which are crowned towards the center.

This program uses a straight cutter, typically 0.250”.


## Top Profile

The “top profile” program is run on the top of the core blank and
imparts the final thickness to the core. This is the longest running
of the programs, and it works from the inside out, eventually stopping
when it reaches the just past the final shape of the board. It goes
further than the final shape because the sidewalls overhang the edge a
bit to allow for alignment error, and of course you want the sidewalls
to have an even thickness their entire width.

This is the longest running program, and it uses a straight cutter. I
use a 1.5” cutter as shown on the [router bits](
http://www.happymonkeysnowboards.com/MonkeyWiki/Router_Bits) page of
MonkeyWiki.

This program also includes a lead-in ramp whenever the cutter plunges
into the core blank to reduce load on the router.


## Top Cutout

The “top cutout” program cuts the final shape of the core and is the
last core program. It runs on the top of the core blank. This cuts the
shape defined by the configuration parameters for the nose and tail
spacers, and it also cuts the sidewalls wider than the final board to
allow for some “overhang” to allow for minor alignment error with the
core.

The core is held in place during the last pass by leaving thin “tabs”,
two on each side, to keep the core stable. After the program
completes, remove the core blank carefully from the machine and cut
thru the tabs to release the core.

This program uses a straight cutter, typically 0.250”, and cuts all
the way thru the core blank.


## Base Cutout

The “base cutout” program cuts a base out of PTEX in a single pass
which is exactly 2mm narrower all the way around than the final board
shape. This is for full-wrap edges.

This program uses a straight cutter, typically 0.250”, and cuts all
the way thru the base material.


## Nose Tail Spacers

The “nose and tail spacers” program cuts nose and tail fillers (the
sidewalls for the nose and tail, essentially) out of thicker PTEX
material in a single pass. These will exactly match the shape of the
nose and tail on the core.

This program uses a straight cutter, typically 0.250”, and cuts all
the way thru the spacer material.


## G-Code Details

The G-Code programs all share many common properties, which is part of
the power of MonkeyCAM. If you set your machine up properly for one,
they will all work.

### Program Header

Each G-Code program has a comment header which contains valuable
information specific to each program. Read it carefully and it will
remind you how to setup the machine for each program, which cutter to
use, etc. All programs contain the following:

* Program name, generation time, and MonkeyCAM version.
* The rapid height the program will use, so ensure you have this
  clearance on all work-holding devices (clamps, etc.)
* Which tool to use.
* Where zero is for the Z axis, which will be the top of the material
  or the top of the table.
* Where X0 Y0 is, typically the left-hand side of the part, with Y at
  the center of the long axis of the board (center of the tip of the
  board.)
* A reminder that G54 is the work coordinates, and G55 is expected to
  be the machine coordinates.
* A reminder that the units are in **inches**.
* The cutter bounding box in G54, which tells you the maximum range
the cutter will move in any axis. This is computed from the generated
G-Code in a separate step from the math which generated it as a safety
measure. If the bounding box looks odd, don’t run the program without
simulating it carefully.


### Program Start

Every program starts with essentially the same block of G-Code. It
sets the coordinate system, cancels any tool offsets, and selects the
tool height offset for the proper tool (as specific in the machine and
tool configuration file). Next, it sets the coordinate system to G54
and moves to X0 Y0 at the proper rapid height, then to the first X,Y
point of the program, still at the rapid height. The spindle is turned
on, followed by a short delay to let the spindle come up to speed,
then the program starts with the first plunge into the part which
includes the first setting of the feed rate.

Every program assumes it is starting at G55 X0 Y0 Z0. This must be
away from the part, and **above the rapid height**, typically at the
lower left-hand corner of the table, at maximum Z height.

CNC controller are inconsistent about how they specify what machine
coordinates are, so I abuse G55 for our machine coordinates since it
will work everywhere.

**Note: these programs assume that altering the cutter height offset
  does not cause motion in the Z axis.**

```
G90 G20 G17 G40 G49
G43 H1 T1
G00 G54 X0 Y0 Z0.1000

G00 X-0.0462 Y-0.0015 Z0.1000
M03
G04 P5
```

### Program End

Every program ends with the same block of code. After completing the
last cut in the part, it rapids straight up to the rapid height, turns
off the spindle, then rapids back to X0 Y0 at the rapid height, still
in G54. It then cancels the tool height offset, feeds slowly up to Z0
in machine coordinates (G55), then homes the machine and ends the
program.

**Note: these programs assume that altering the cutter height offset
  does not cause motion in the Z axis.**

```
G00 X-0.0462 Y-0.0015 Z0.1000
M05
G00 X0.0000 Y0.0000 Z0.1000
G49
G01 G55 Z0 F20
G00 G55 X0 Y0 Z0
M30
```
