# MonkeyCAM v4 User's Guide

MonkeyCAM v4 is an open source CAD/CAM program for designing skis, snowboards and splitboards, and generating
[G-code](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G-code) programs to cut board
parts with a [CNC
machine](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Numerical_control).

MonkeyCAM is currently command-line only. It takes configuration files
to describe the ski or snowboard shape via a small set of parameters
and generates the following nine G-code programs:

* Base cutout
* Core:
  * Guide holes to allow the core to be removed and flipped between programs
  * Alignment marks to transfer key design points to the bottom of the core
  * Edge relief to leave room for steel edges
  * Insert holes for standard snowboard inserts (T-nuts) in a variety of patterns
  * Top profile to impart the taper to the core
  * Cutout, allowing for sidewall overhang and nose/tail spacers
* Nose and tail spacers which match the core
* Edge trenches to enable inlay of different edge wood and/or sidewall
  material along the effective edge of the core

For splitboards, it also generates one more program:

* Center trench to enable inlay of sidewall material along the center of the core

MonkeyCAM also generates an overview HTML file which shows diagrams
for all of the generated shapes and programs. Using this it is very
easy to iterate on a design and make fine adjustments. Example:
https://rawgit.com/mikemag/MonkeyCAM/master/Sample-output/Sample-snowboard-overview.html

## G-Code Programs

The G-Code programs generated by MonkeyCAM are designed to work
together to create the parts necessary to build a ski or
snowboard. This includes the core, base material, and nose/tail filler
material.

See the [MonkeyCAM v4 G-Code Program Guide](G-Code_Program_Guide.md)
for more details.

## Configuration Files

MonkeyCAM uses three configuration files, one to describe the board/ski, one to
describe the binding inserts (optional, no inserts if ommitted), and one to
describe the details of how to machine the board. The board
definition file describes the shape of the board, and the thickness and
taper of the core. The binding definition file describes the placement of
inserts. The machine and tool definition file describes machining parameters
used by various programs (rapid and various cutting heights and depths, raw
material thicknesses, etc.) and parameters of each tool used.

See the [MonkeyCAM v4 Configuration Guide](Configuration_Guide.md)
for more details.
